Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and
we're establishing proper foundations for
geometry. Today's lecture is a very important one
because we make the transition from 20th-century
geometry to 21st-century geometry. We do that by
introducing a better form of measurement than that
is classically used, one that actually goes back
to ancient Greece. We also establish the two most
important theorems in all of mathematics. So I
remind you that up till now we've been talking
about points and lines. A point for us is an
ordered pair of rational numbers. We are working
only over the rational number field. A line is
a proportion of three rational numbers, and we
say that the point A lies on the line L precisely
when a times x plus b times y plus c equals zero.
Now we want to establish an idea of separation
between points. We have two points: how do
we measure how far those points are apart? The
traditional answer is distance, but as we've seen,
Euclid does not use distance, and we're not going
to either. We're going to use something more akin
to what the ancient Greeks did: the notion of
quadrants. The quadrants between two points a1
and a2 is given by this simple formula: the
difference between the x-coordinates squared
plus the difference in the y-coordinates squared.
That ensures that it's always a rational number;
there are no square roots that we're taking,
so we stay inside the domain in which we work.
Some obvious properties: first of all, it's
symmetric; if you change the a1 and a2,
the quadrants does not change. Secondly,
the quadrants is zero precisely when the
two points are actually the same because if
this squared plus this squared equals zero,
then this must be zero and this
must be zero as well. Finally,
the quadrants is always a positive number
because squares are always positive.
So in our mind, a point is really an object in
the coordinate plane. For example, the point (2,
1) really represents, in our mind, this point
here with x-coordinate 2 and y-coordinate 1,
and the point B with coordinates (6, 2) represents
this point here. What's the quadrants between A
and B? Well, by definition, it's the difference
between the x-coordinates squared plus the
difference between the y-coordinates squared
for a total of 17. And what is the meaning of
that geometrically? It has a very simple
meaning: the quadrants is just the area
of the square built on that segment. That's
exactly the kind of quantity that the ancient
Greeks used in their understanding of geometry.
Moreover, this quantity can be calculated without
any irrational numbers because we can subdivide
this square into pieces whose areas we can count.
C, D, and E are three collinear points.
The three quadrants formed by them,
you can calculate easily, are 10, 40, and 90. So
that quadrants is 10, that quadrants is 40, and
that quadrants is 90. An absolutely fundamental
question is: what is the relationship between
these three numbers? The other important problem
is when we have a right triangle like this,
where this line and this line are perpendicular.
You can calculate that the quadrants here are 5,
20, and 25. I think you probably all know what
the relationship between these three numbers is,
but the relationship between these three
numbers is almost as important historically.
Pythagoras' theorem comes first, so let's look
at that one first. We have three points a1,
a2, and a3, and in general, we'll use the
notation that q1 represents the quadrants
between a2 and a3, q2 represents
the quadrants between a1 and a3,
and q3 represents the quadrants between a1 and
a2. Then Pythagoras' theorem states that a1a3,
which is the line through these two points, is
perpendicular to a2a3, the line between these
two points, precisely when this relation between
the quadrants holds: q3 equals q1 plus q2. And
this is the way Euclid stated the theorem as well.
He did not state it in terms of distances squared;
he stated it in terms of areas of squares,
which is exactly what these quadrants
represent. So this is a more modern but also
more ancient form of this most important theory.
Now let's have a look at a proof. We'll suppose
that a1, a2, and a3 have coordinates x1, y1,
x2, y2, x3, y3. Now we've already established a
theorem that tells us what the line is joining
two points, so here's the line between a1 and a3,
and here's the line joining a2 and a3 in terms of
the coordinates. We also know by definition what
it means for these two lines to be perpendicular.
They're perpendicular precisely when this times
this plus this times this equals zero. Now let's
have a look at the right-hand side up here: we
have q3 equals q1 plus q2, so let's look at q1
plus q2 minus q3. There's q1, there's q2, and then
we've subtracted q3, and when you work that out,
you expand it all out, you have a good look at
it, and then you can verify that what you end
up getting is two times this expression. Now what
is this expression? It's exactly the expression
that occurred up here. So when this expression is
zero, then this expression is zero, meaning that
q1 plus q2 equals q3, and conversely, when this
expression is zero, then this expression is zero,
meaning that the two lines are perpendicular. This
is a completely algebraic proof of Pythagoras'
theorem. It doesn't involve any pictures; it is
therefore more powerful than any proof involving
pictures. It extends, in other words, to many
other situations and other fields as well.
Now let's have a look at the other crucial
and important result. Here is the second
most important theorem in mathematics.
It's called the triple quad formula,
and using exactly the same notation as we've
had, the line a1a3 is parallel to the line
a2a3 precisely when this relation holds: q3 minus
q1 minus q2 all squared equals 4 times q1 times
q2. That's more complicated than Pythagoras'
theorem, and it's perhaps no surprise that
Euclid did not discover this theorem. Here's
a proof, or at least an outline of a proof:
these two lines are parallel precisely when the
three points are collinear. In our previous video,
we've established when three points are collinear.
It comes down to this expression being zero in the
coordinates of the points. Now let's look at the
difference between the left and the right-hand
side. There's the right-hand side minus the
left-hand side; that's an expression involving
lots of q1s, q2s, x1s, and y2s, and so on.
When you substitute that in, expand it all out,
then a remarkable factorization appears. You
end up getting 4 times this quantity squared,
and this quantity that's appearing here is
exactly the same as this quantity. So this
being zero implies that this equals zero, and
this being zero implies that this equals zero.
In other words, the three points are collinear
precisely when this algebraic relation holds.
This is a very important result, and with
Pythagoras' theorem, these are the two main
pillars of metrical geometry in the plane.
This is all described at some length in my
YouTube series called "WildTrig on Rational
Trigonometry," which I strongly suggest that
you have a look at. Next time we're going to
look at the separation between two lines and
introduce the important idea of a spread. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger.